---
title: Pentaho Web Package
description: Describes how to package web client resources, including visualizations, into the Pentaho platform.
layout: default
---

The Pentaho Platform detects and manages [OSGi](https://www.osgi.org/) bundles that contain **Pentaho Web Packages**, 
collecting the information needed to build the AMD/RequireJS configuration and 
to setup the mappings needed to serve the package resources through HTTP.

The package is described by a `package.json` file, based upon the [package.json spec](https://docs.npmjs.com/files/package.json) and 
is mostly compatible with files generated by the [npm](https://www.npmjs.com) tool.

These are, for now, the relevant supported fields:

## name and version

**mandatory**

The most important fields in `package.json` are the `name` and `version` fields. 
Those are required, and the package must not install without them.
- The name must be shorter than 214 characters, including the scope, for scoped packages;
- The name can't start with a dot or an underscore;
- The name should not have uppercase letters;
- The name will end up being part of an URL;
  therefore, the name should avoid any non-URL-safe characters;
  however, forward-slashes, `/`, are allowed; 
- The version must follow the the Semantic Versioning Specification (http://semver.org/).

The name and version together form a unique system identifier for the package 
which is used internally as the base AMD/RequireJS module identifier and 
as part of the HTTP location where the resources are served.

Example:

```json
{
  "name": "my-viz-lib",
  "version": "1.0.0"
}
```

Names can also be scoped to an organization, as in:

```json
{
  "name": "@my-org/viz-lib",
  "version": "1.0.0"
}
```

## paths

Exposes the resources under a given package path under a base module identifier.

When unspecified, the literal package name is used to map the package's root path, 
as if the following had been specified:

```json
{
  "name": "@my-org/viz-lib",
  "version": "1.0.0",
  "paths": {
    "@my-org/viz-lib": "/"
  }
}
```

While it is common to specify scoped and hyphenated package names, AMD module identifiers are, more commonly, 
valid JavaScript identifiers.
So, in this case, it would make more sense to explicitly specify a root module, such as in:

```json
{
  "name": "@my-org/viz-lib",
  "version": "1.0.0",
  "paths": {
    "myOrg/visual": "/"
  }
}
```
 
## dependencies

Dependencies are specified in a simple object that maps a package name to a version range.
The version range is a string which has one or more space-separated descriptors, 
as defined in https://github.com/npm/node-semver#ranges.

```json
{
  "name": "@my-org/viz-lib", 
  "version": "1.0.0",
  "paths": {
    "myOrg/visual": "/"
  },
  "dependencies": { 
    "bar": "~2.0" 
  }
}
```

This information is used by the platform to find out the dependency tree, do the runtime dependency resolution, and 
build the proper AMD/RequireJS mappings that will allow each package to request external modules 
that satisfy the dependencies’ version restrictions.

For instance, in the above example, the code in the `@my-org/viz-lib` package can use modules from the `bar` 
dependency without the knowledge that it is available at a path such as `/bar@2.1.4/foo`.

### Unsupported identifiers

Only version ranges are supported. You cannot use:
- Local paths
- URLs
- Git URLs
- GitHub short URLs 

## config

A configuration object that is made available to AMD/RequireJS modules that 
match the module identifier listed in the config object.
Modules with a matching module identifier can access the configuration object via `module.config`.

In particular, 
this is used to configure the `pentaho/modules` module, 
used as a basic inversion-of-control mechanism to inject the package resources into the system.

For instance, to declare that the package JavaScript module at `config.js` 
exports a value which is an instance of the type `pentaho/config/spec/IRuleSet`, 
you would do:
```json
{ 
  "name": "@my-org/viz-lib", 
  "version": "1.0.0",
  "paths": {
    "myOrg/visual": "/"
  },
  "config": {
    "pentaho/modules": {
      "myOrg/visual/config": {"type": "pentaho/config/spec/IRuleSet"}
    }
  }
}
```

Another use is to declare that a type such as that exported by the JavaScript module at `Model.js` is 
subtype of the visualization base type, `pentaho/visual/Model`:
```json
{ 
  "name": "@my-org/viz-lib", 
  "version": "1.0.0",
  "paths": {
    "myOrg/visual": "/"
  },
  "config": {
    "pentaho/modules": {
      "myOrg/visual/Model": {"base": "pentaho/visual/Model"}
    }
  }
}
```
