docs/platform/visual/samples/bar-d3-sandbox/index.md, before:

---
title: Create a custom Bar chart visualization using D3
description: Walks you through the creation of a simple Bar chart visualization that uses the D3 graphics library.
parent-title: Visualization API
parent-path: ../..
layout: default
---

This walk-through will guide you through the creation of a simple Bar chart visualization, 
using the Pentaho Visualization API and the amazing [D3](https://d3js.org/) graphics library.
 
The complete code of this sample is available at 
[pentaho/pentaho-engineering-samples]({{site.platformSamplesBaseUrl | append: "javascript-apis/platform/pentaho/visual/samples/bar-d3-sandbox"}}).

## Prerequisites

- Basic JavaScript knowledge
- Basic D3 knowledge
- An npm registry compatible package manager like [npm](https://www.npmjs.com) or [yarn](https://yarnpkg.com).

## Steps

The walk-through is divided in the following steps:

1. [Preparing the environment](step1-environment-preparation)
2. [Creating the model](step2-model-creation)
3. [Creating the view](step3-view-creation)
4. [Styling the view](step4-view-styling)
5. [Adding interactivity to the view](step5-view-interactivity)
6. [Adding a default configuration](step6-default-configuration)
7. [Next steps](stepNext)

**Start** with [Preparing the environment](step1-environment-preparation).

Commit message:

[BACKLOG-16452] Improved Top Platform page by creating boxes for “Web… (#1060)
* [BACKLOG-16452] Improved Top Platform page by creating boxes for “Web Package”, “OSGi Web Project” and “OSGi Artifact Deployment”
* Changed the structure of the VizAPI page to feature a fast-lane to Build, Deploy and Configure.
* Updated Bar/D3 sample to not use packages, so that it better matched the ones used in Web Packages.

* [BACKLOG-16452] Fixing footer links

* [BACKLOG-16452] Fixes to naming and heading levels

* [BACKLOG-16452] From Marco’s feedback.
Squashed “Develop”, “Create Web Package” and “Create OSGi Web Project” into the walk-through “Create”.

* [BACKLOG-16452] Additional changes to take MILF’s opinions into account.
Also, revised the “2. Create the Pentaho Web Package” text to try to demistify the Web Package concept.

docs/platform/visual/samples/bar-d3-sandbox/index.md, after:

---
title: Bar/D3 Visualization in Sandbox
description: Walks you through the development of a simple Bar chart visualization that uses the D3 graphics library, under a controlled sandbox environment.
parent-title: Visualization API
parent-path: ../..
layout: default
---

This walk-through will guide you through the development of a simple Bar chart visualization, 
using the Pentaho Visualization API and the amazing [D3](https://d3js.org/) graphics library.
 
The complete code of this sample is available at 
[pentaho/pentaho-engineering-samples]({{site.platformSamplesBaseUrl | append: "javascript-apis/platform/pentaho/visual/samples/bar-d3-sandbox"}}).

## Prerequisites

- Basic JavaScript knowledge
- Basic D3 knowledge
- An npm registry compatible package manager like [npm](https://www.npmjs.com) or [yarn](https://yarnpkg.com).

## Steps

This walk-through is divided in the following steps:

1. [Preparing the environment](step1-environment-preparation)
2. [Creating the model](step2-model-creation)
3. [Creating the view](step3-view-creation)
4. [Styling the view](step4-view-styling)
5. [Adding interactivity to the view](step5-view-interactivity)
6. [Adding a default configuration](step6-default-configuration)
7. [Next steps](stepNext)

**Start** with [Preparing the environment](step1-environment-preparation).
